Harley MS 4690
A semi-diplomatic edition

Transcription, gloss, notes, and critical introduction by Leila K. Norako and Shyama Rajendran
XML editing, Coding Introduction, and additional notes by Caitlin Postal 

fol. 109r

<!--LKN text: The version of RCL contained in Harley MS 4690 begins on fol. 109r in the second/right-hand column. The first column and the preceding folio are blank, and this particular witness of RCL begins mid-sentence and midway through the Tournament of Salisbury episode. This particular witness is remarkable in that it is placed into a prose chronicle (The Prose Brut) to account for this particular part of English history.-->
<!--LKN summ: The Tournament of Salisbury-->
That itte was Richarde the kingge <!--Sarah test note the second-->
he wende he hadde be att Salesbury <!--LKN expl: explain here that this is a fictional episode that only certain witnesses include. insert names of witnesses here with relevant fol. numbers and, in time, links if desired-->
att the castell and made hem mery
They priked ther stedez [and] togeder mette
Our ffoukedoly soche a stroke he sette <!--LKN expl: explain who this and Thomas Multon are and acknowledge the spelling variations of Fouk's name. Supplying Larkin’s note here for now since we’ll want to draw on it and Finlayson, who he references: 399 Fouke Doly. Of undoubted historicity, Fulk D’Oilly and Thomas Moulton (line 433) were Lincolnshire knights connected by marriage in the thirteenth century. As they do not appear in chronicles of the Third Crusade, Finalyson suggests that the large role these knights play in RCL’s a version represents an early redactor’s efforts “to glorify his or a patron’s family,” since the names do not occur in L, the fragment that Finlayson believes to contain the story’s basic form (“‘Richard, Coer de Lyon,’” p. 166; and “Legendary Ancestors”) (METS RCL, n. 399)-->
amydde is schelde with outen tale
that itte to scheuerid in to pecis smale
And with that dynte so harde he threste
Thatt the schafte a too he braste
The knight fell down sothe to seye
The kingge rode northe on is . wey
yn to the foreste is wey he name
ther wist no man were he became
Syr ffoukdoly with moche paine
on horse was y sette againe. 
This was the firste tyme y ȝow plight
that king Richarde preued is might
[and] of is strengthe he had gode game
and went home in goddis name
yn to the castell by a derne way
that no man knewe hym [þat] day
he unarmed hym sekyr [þ??] be <!--LKN text: Brunner expands the abbreviation to read "þon", and that makes the most contextual sense. The abbreviation symbol above the thorn, however, looks like u, though it is in all likelyhood a (perhaps hastily) written lower-case n.-->
Nough of the knightes speke Dolie
and of the iustes that was [þat] day 
and hough thei passidde then away
Thei commawnded hastely
The heraudez to make acrye
and euery man for to wende
home tille is own ffrende
The king a messawnger gan sende <!--LKN summ: King Richard summons Sir Thomas Multon and Sir Fouk Doily-->
[And] bad hym priuely for to wende
To Syr Thomas of moltonne
that was a nobell baroune
and to Syr ffoukedoly
that thei come to me an highe
that thei dwelle in no manere
Tille that þei be bothen here
the messanger sone was wente
And seid the king to tham had sente

fol. 109v

Priuely to come hym vn to
with oute lettyng that itte be doo
they hyeden fast on her way
and come to hym on a day
when thei come the king was glade
and mochell wye to them he made
and seid to hem in mery sowne
ȝe be welcome by seint Symonne. <!--LKN expl: the apostle St. Simon, not to be confused with Simon Peter-->
lordes he seid knowe ȝe  notte
Wat y haue ordeinedde in my þought.
yn to the holy londe for to goo <!--LKN expl: The journey that Richard, Thomas, and Fouk agree to embark upon in this episode is a fiction. Richard never undertook such a journey prior to going to Outremer on crusade.--> 
whe thre felaues and no mo
Al in palmeren gyse <!--LKN expl: The term "palmer" referred specifically to a pilgrim bound for Jerusalem. The term referred to the particular badge that such a pilgrim would wear as a sign of their intended destination; pilgrim's bound for Jerusalem wore a palm badge that recalled Christ's celebrated entry into Jerusalem prior to his crucifixion. The term "guise" here, however, makes it very clear that Richard and his fellow knights are not intending for this journey to be a pious one. They are, instead, disguising themselves as pilgrims in order to embark on a reconaissance mission that will aid them in their later crusading endeavors.-->
the holy londe for to devise.
to me y will that ȝe be sworne
that ȝe ne tell to no man borne.
thei grawnted hym is askingge
with out any againe seyyngge.
with hym to líue and to dye
Notte to lette for loue ne eye. <!--LKN “for loue ne eye” This idiomatic phrase translates as “[neither ]for love nor fear.” See entry for “eie” (1) in The Middle English Dictionary. https://quod.lib.umich.edu/m/middle-english-dictionary/dictionary/MED13117-->
Vppon the bouke thei leide her honed
To that couenante for to stoned
thei kiste the Bouke all y three.
trow ffelawes for to bee.
when her couenawnt was y made
the king spake with herte glade.
my leue ffrendes with gode entente
hough fferde ȝe at the turmente.
came any strong knight to yo[ur] play
ȝe  thei seyden in gode fay. <!--LKN: "in gode fay" means "in good faith."-->
And awntres knight ther came ride
in diuerse atyre with mochel pride
he felde down both hors [and] manne
hym myght noon w[ith]stonde aȝeyne.
ȝe [quod] the kyng by his saye
of that knyght y schalle ȝow seye.
yche . was theder goon for certe
tho wer they gladde [and] blithe in herte.
that he loued her ffelawrede
ffor he was [and] doughty man of dede.
and also queynte in many case
ther for thei maden grete solase.
Trompes blewen and made acrye
to geder thei wenten hastlye. 
<!--LKN text: the space here signifies where a new column begins-->
Bi the twenty day att ende.
Redy thei weren. Vn to wende.
With Bordon scrippe [and] sclauenne <!--LKN expl: a pilgrim's staff and cloak. Perhaps add more info on the terms and on the matter of pilgrim's attire here-->
as palmers wer. and pilgryme.
they touke leue of ther ffrende
And to schippe ganne thei wende.
they drewe vppe saíle þ[e] wynde was gode
and sayled ouer the salte fflode.
vppon fflawnders sothe to seye <!--LKN expl: explain significance of Flanders as an initial destination, perhaps-->
Aryved king R[ichard] and is ffelawes tweye
they wenten northe alle in ffere
ffrom town to town as ȝe may here
Til thei come to Brawndys
that is a coste of noubell pryse.
A schippe theí fownden thare
yn to Cypresse for to. ffars.
they sette vppe sayle y vnderstonde
att Samagus þey.touke the londe
there they dwelled .xl. dayes
And sithe did hem in to the see . 
yn to Artys þatt fair cite
ffro thennes in to mascidone.
And to the cite of Babilone
And to the cite of Sesare.
And to the cite of Jer[usalem]. <!--LKN text: potential t-note. This has to be an abbreviation for Jerusalem, but it is unusual. Also of note, perhaps, is that unlike other witnesses, the rhyme scheme is broken between the lines ending with Cesare and Jerusalem because there appears to be a “missing” line. Brunner, in fact, writes “fehlt” (i.e. “is missing”) in his note for this line (pg. 111, n. 638), which in other versions refers to the city of Nineva and ends with the word “ware.” Based on the break in rhyme, this is very likely an eye-skip on the part of the copyist.-->
To betayne and to Bedleem
and to the cite of Sudraunturpys
and to the cite of Ebedye.
and to the castell of Orgylous.
and to the cite of peryeus.
To Japhes and to saffrane
to taburet and to Archane. <!--LKN expl: will need to provide a note here on the combination of real and fictional place names in this list-->
thus visited they the holylonde
Ryghe þurgh oute y vnderstone.
So then homwarde þei haue y tyghte
yn to Englond with all her might
when they wer passed. þe grekes. see
yn to almayne thenn roden hee. <!--LKN summ: Richard, Thomas, and Fouk arrive in Germany> <!--LKN expl: This episode, which recounts Richard's imprisonment by the king of Germany is largely a fiction. While the historical King Richard was imprisoned in Germany, this occurred on his return from Outremer, not before it. To the best of our knowledge, the historical Richard did not kill the king's son, sleep with the king's daughter, and kill a lion with his bare hands while a prisoner.>
and he þat in almeyne was king.
hated king Richard abow. al thing
Richard an is ffelawes too
yn to towne they wer agoo.
thay touke her ynne sekurlye.

fol. 110r

And ȝede to towne her mete to bye
theigh bought a goos to ther mete
hem longed sore suche fflesche to ete
kyng Richard the fure bette
ffoukdoly to the spite hym sette.
Thomas of Molton stamped þe wose
wel dere thei Bought þike goose.
when the goos was rosted . welle
yn ther came a mynstrelle .
and iff itte her wille were
of is myrthe thei schulde hyre .
Richard hym answered [and] seid nay
whe mote ete and go oure . way
ye beth vncurteys so me thynke
ye ne biddeth this mynstrell no drinke
ye wer well better by this Day
thus by hym self ganne he seye.
his weye he towke faire [and] welle
tille he come to the castelle . 
there the king of Almayne was
and to the porter he made is pas
and seyde go yn an hyyngge .
and sey thus to my lorde kyngge.
there ben . y come in to is londe
þre palmers y vnderstonde.
the strengest menne yn cristiante
y schall tell watt they bee .
kyng Richard. þ[at] is bothe stout [and] grym <!--LKN text: need a t-note here addressing the mark above the word grym. Not entirely sure what it is, as the word is not abbreviated, and Brunner offers nothing in his notes. Interested to hear what you think about this, all!)>
and .ii. Baronnes ther be w[ith] hym
Syr ffoukedoly off renowne
and Syr Thomas of moltonne .
the porter ȝede ynne to the halle
and telde the lorde þar wordes alle
the kyng was glad of this tidyng
and swore is othe in hyyng . 
the mynstrell that hath do þis dede
full welle schalle haue is made . 
the kyng commawnded is knyght . þo
Belyue to cite ffor to goo . 
and nymeth the palmers alle þre
and Bringeth hem hider By fore me
fforths her wey they nomenne

To Richarde is ynne sone thei comen
and axed who ys att ynne here
kyng Richarde answered w[ith] myld chere
whe bene here palmers three . 
oute of hethenesse nough come whe
the knyghtes seide on hyyngge
ȝe schull speke w[ith] oure lorde the kyng
ffor tidynggez he wolde here ffayne
thei touke the palmers [and] went again
when the Emperour sighe king Richard
he seyd þis ys he so dow me garde
that is my dodelyche foo
he schalle abye or that he goo . 
the Emperour axed the palmers þre . 
ynne my londe watt syke .yee.
he seide to hem with ffelonye
ye ben come my londe to *sp*ye . <!--LKN text: the first two characters of the word "spye" are all but illegible due to damage/smudging. We are, as a result, following the lead not only of Karl Brunner here but of the other witnesses who share this passage with Harley MS 4690. See Brunner, p. 116)>
and som tresonne me to done
thenne seide kyng Richarde swith . sone
whe ar palmers sothe to seye
and wenden here in goddes weye . 
the emp[er]our named hym king by name
and and cleped hym taylard [and] seid hym scham <!--LKN expl: calling someone a "taylard" (someone who has a tale) was considered an insult. See the MED entry for tailarde 1.a).>
but for as moche as thou arte kyng
and thes thi baronnes w[ith]oute lesyng.
ye schull notte be to with y dyghte
þor for y seye that itte is righte .
ȝe schull be in a prisonne
and that is skele and resonne 
Richarde seide with herte free.
though doest no right so mete y thee
palmers thatt goo by the weye
þ[ou] ne scholdest hem dery myght ne daye
Syr Emperour for thy courtesye.
Do palmers no velanye .
ffor ys loue þ[at] vs dere boughte
lete vs goo and dere vs noughte
he commawnded . swithe sone
yn prisoune þei schuld be done
the porter ganne hem vnderfongge
and towke Richarde by þe honde
and bothe is felawes hym with
there hadde they no nother gryth <!--LKN text: the final character of 'gryth' is illegible. Following both Brunner and the logic of the rhyme scheme as a result.>

fol. 110v

Till that other day atte prime
the kyngges sone come that tyme . 
Ardour was is right name
he thought to do kyng Richarde schame .
ffor he was holden y understonde
the strengest man of alle þat londe . 
To the porter thenne seide hæ
alle þi[s] prisoners þ[ou] lette me see . <!---LKN text: there is an abbreviation mark above the "þi," but Brunner does not account for it in his edition. My guess is that it's meant to be expanded with an "s" at the end, but would like to hear your thoughts also!>
the porter seide syr atte thy wille
youre commawndement y schall fylle . 
he bronght hem fforthe sone anone
and Richarde ganne fformost gone . 
the emperour ys sone hym vndernam
Art thow Richard þe strong manne . 
as men seyen in euery londe
Durste þu stonde a boffete of my honde <!--LKN text: Brunner transcribes as "boffett" but the final letter looks much more like an "e." would welcome your takes on this! If you agree, this should be a t-note>
and y schalle youe the leue
A nother boffette me to yeve <!--LKN text: Note for those doing transcription check: this took me a little while to sort out, but the last word of this line is, in fact, leve (if you look at the v in "devise" on line 66 of this version, which is a handful of lines down on the first colum of 109v, it becomes a lot easier to see in this line)
hastely kyng Richarde
G[ra]unted hym in that fforwarde . 
the emperour is sone bothe fers [and] prout
yaff to Rych[arde] a swithe sore cloute . 